1  
 
 
California Department of Forestry & Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) Reforestation 
Services Program 2025 Assessment of Needs for the State Seed Bank,  
May 20, 2025 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Scope and objective: Establish an analytical process for targeted conifer seed collection 
throughout California. 
Methods Used: Geographic Information Systems (GIS) data layers were used to provide 
baseline forest land mass areas, seed zones, elevation bands, total and high-severity wildfire 
perimeters, and tree mortality areas. The dataset generated was then exported for further 
analytics to target desired species, incorporate CAL FIRE-s Seed Bank inventory, nursery 
requirements, and CAL FIRE Units to obtain the target number of conifer cone bushels to 
reforest 25 percent of forest land area in California. 
Findings and recommendations: A grand total of 55,978 bushels of conifer cones would need 
to be collected throughout the various seed zones, elevations bands, and species to address 
2025 needs that target a 25% reforestation goal statewide on included lands and under the 
current vegetation distribution. While this Assessment of Needs (AON) is extensive, the 
recommendation is to use this document as a guide with the datasets subject to amendments 
as variables change. 
New features in 2025 since the last publication of this report (July 2024): The 2025 analysis 
includes (1) a more recent version of the Landscape Ecology, Modeling, Mapping, and Analysis 
(LEMMA) vegetation data published by Oregon State University (version 2023.1) and (2) a new 
data source for productive timberlands. Timberlands boundary is still mapped internally by 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
2  
CAL FIRE, but the underlying data source has been updated from the U.S. Forest Service 
CalVeg data, a fine-scale vegetation mapping product, to the even higher resolution current 
and historic LEMMA vegetation. This update resulted in an expanded area of interest for our 
analysis compared to July 2024 and masks some of the seed collection progress over the past 
year. However, this update also makes our analysis more consistent, as the entire AON area of 
interest is now derived from the same underlying LEMMA vegetation data source.  
Limitations: The current version of the assessment does not explicitly exclude privately-owned 
industrial land. However, the Seed Bank primarily collects seed on state-owned and non-
industrial private forestlands. The estimated seed collection need statistics therefore 
somewhat overestimate the actual need, which is lower due to industrial seed reserves.  
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The purpose of the Assessment of Needs for the State Seed Bank (AON) is to provide a 
structured framework for directing the seed collection resources of the California Department 
of Forestry & Fire Protection-s (CAL FIRE-s) Reforestation Services Program (RSP), targeting and 
prioritizing efforts across all 85 seed zones and all 500-foot elevation bands for all native conifer 
tree species within all forested landscapes of State and Local Responsibility Areas (SRA and LRA) 
within the State of California. The information contained within this document should be seen 
as first, a tool for RSP staff, second, as a guide for internal and external collaborators, and third, 
as a resource for general consumption. 
 
CAL FIRE has a need for a systematic way to estimate the number of bushels needed for 
collection that will be needed to grow sufficient seedlings for reforestation on state and private 
forest lands. In this analysis, spatial data layers were used to identify areas of productive 
conifer species and where they intersected with elevation, seed zones, and, as a proxy for 
disturbance, wildfire history and historic tree mortality due to insects and disease. That 
information was then used to calculate carrying capacity and deviation below those productive 
thresholds (or seed lots). When combined with the results of the RSP-s existing seed inventory, 
a concerted approach to cone surveying and collection can be made to replenish seed lots of 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
3  
greatest need. The results of this exercise for 2025 are to be shared with internal and external 
cooperators with the expectation that datasets are revisited, and a corresponding report and 
table produced annually. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Healthy forests provide a multitude of benefits. Wood products, wildlife habitat, clean water 
and air, recreation, education, and steady employment are but a handful of the immense values 
they support. Recognizing the vast environmental, economic, and social benefits of this natural 
resource, it is incumbent on resource managers to improve forest conditions and lessen threats 
in the face of climate change and persistent drought, as well as forest disturbances including 
catastrophic wildfire, insect and diseases, and poor forest management and land conversion.  
 
Table 1 presents an overview of disturbance statistics within productive conifer forests on non-
federal lands of California between 2018 and 2024. These years were chosen as they are more 
recent (and larger) fires that still have reforestation potential. 2023 is the most recent year of 
tree mortality and wildfire severity data available at the time of publication. The numbers are 
based on our calculations using a variety of state and federal data. The details of these 
calculations are outlined in the methodology section, in subsection C. An estimated 1.5 million 
acres burned on non-federal conifer forestlands, with 0.36 million acres burning at high severity. 
Among our conifer species of interest, 22.5 million trees died from exposure to insects and 
diseases. Data on tree mortality is missing for 2020, so this number is an underestimate. Due to 
the devasting tree mortality (including that of parent seed trees), increased wildfire, as well as 
other biotic and abiotic factors, there grew an increasing need for post-disturbance 
reforestation and thus a surging demand for seeds and seedlings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
4  
 
Year 
Tree Mortality due to 
Insects and Diseases 
(in Millions) 
Acres Burned by  
Wildfires 
High-Severity 
Acres Burned by 
Wildfires 
2018 2.7 273,113 68,369 
2019 2.0 32,378 5,306 
2020 - 623,868 185,261 
2021 1.9 356,392 78,586 
2022 9.7 73,705 20,679 
2023 6.2 5,918 981 
2024  142,456  
Total 22.5 1,507,830 359,182 
 
Table 1: Disturbance Statistics by Year 
 
To help meet the mounting need for reforestation services on SRA lands, CAL FIRE operates a 
single Reforestation Center for the entire state, located in Davis, California. The center 
encompasses the only remaining State-run conifer seed bank and nursery. Established in 1921, 
the Lewis A. Moran Reforestation Center (LAMRC) has provided reforestation resources to 
public and private non-industrial landowners throughout the state of California in the form of 
seeds and seedlings for over 100 years. Unfortunately, due to budget restrictions, the nursery 
portion of LAMRC was shut down in 2006. The seed bank remained functional and continued to 
collect, process, and store seeds with drastically reduced staffing. In 2017, a Budget Change 
Proposal adopted by California State Legislature allowed for additional staffing for the RSP as 
well as related infrastructure and facility upgrades at LAMRC to expand seed storage capacity 
along with the necessary nursery equipment to eventually increase production of up to 1 
million seedlings annually for forestland owners. While those improvements have yet to fully 
materialize, and despite fluctuations in yearly funding, the RSP has maintained CAL FIRE-s 
ongoing mission to serve and safeguard the people and protect the property and resources of 
California.   
 
RSP staffing remains minimal, employing 8 full-time employees and 5-10 seasonal or limited-
term hires engaged in both seed bank and nursery operations. The employees not only manage 
seed requests made by forestland owners but engage in the day-to-day processing of cones and 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
5  
seeds, as well as the coordination of surveys and collections of cones from field locations at 
optimal times of year. In 2024, staff and cooperators collected 4,630 bushels of cone which 
resulted in more than 3,696 pounds of processed seed destined for the public seed bank or set 
aside privately as cooperator orchard seed shares. Exact final amounts are unavailable at the 
time of this report given ongoing processing. The Seed Bank staff also facilitated the sale and 
distribution of 801 pounds of seed, while Nursery staff processed 24 unique seedling orders, 
growing a quarter million seedlings, amounting to 182,551 seedlings distributed in 2024 with the 
remainder distributed in Spring 2025. While very dedicated and productive, the RSP suffers not 
only from limited staffing, but antiquated processing and accounting systems, as well as 
restricted storage and growing capacity. 
 
 
 
Cone surveys, which serve as the first step in reforestation pipeline, are inconsistently done, 
historically, by regional unit foresters with many conflicting duties, and the results of which are 
usually submitted to the RSP on paper sheets with limited accuracy or utility. Personnel, 
experience, and leveraged technology are not only lacking for the surveying of ripening cones 
but in their collection as well. Current practices see but a handful of experienced surveyors and 
collectors utilizing binoculars and traditional climbing practices to gather intelligence and 
materials from forest stands which are not always themselves accessible or practical for 
harvesting. Aside from minor investments in cooperative seed orchards out of state, the RSP 
lacks a steady supply of farmed or genetically bred seed stock, and thus, relies on the intricacies 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
6  
of wild seed collections on lands not owned by the Department which require access 
agreements and other negotiations. In factoring in the related struggle of demand for 
reforestation materials far outweighing supply, and the compounding obstacles that add to site 
preparation as time before replanting lengthens, the entire industry is facing increasing 
adversity. 
 
All these processes are in some form of being updated and modernized as staffing/funding 
increase and attention is given to the importance of growing the reforestation supply pipeline, 
however this does illustrate the challenges we currently face. With the many challenges that 
hamper adequate reforestation of degraded forestlands, a methodical approach needs to be 
employed routinely to evaluate a prioritized and enhanced response to the needs of these 
crucial landscapes in California. 
 
 
 
Further enabled by the goals of the 2021 California Wildfire and Forest Resilience Action Plan, 
CAL FIRE is working to meet the following key actions relative to its RSP, as follows: 
1.15 Provide Seedlings for Restoration: CAL FIRE will expand its nursery and seed bank 
to deliver seeds and seedlings to small landowners whose properties are affected by 
wildfire or diseases. Experts will focus on using native seed selections that are best 
suited to current and future landscapes. 
1.34 Develop Coordinated State Restoration Strategy: California Natural Resource 
Agency (CNRA) will partner with the California Office of Emergency Services (Cal OES), 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
7  
The Office of Planning and Research (OPR), and other federal, state, and local agencies 
to develop a coordinated strategy to prioritize and restore non-federal burned areas 
and communities as part of the state-s overall long-term recovery and resilience 
strategies. 
 
 
 
 
  METHODOLOGY 
 
RSP staff realizes that a rational approach is needed to estimate the number of seeds to grow 
sufficient numbers of seedlings to restore California-s state and private forests. An Assessment 
of Needs (AON) was developed in conjunction with this report to determine how many bushels 
of seed need to be collected to reforest 25% of productive conifer forests on non-federal lands 
at any given time throughout the state of California. Twenty-five percent was determined to be 
an obtainable goal for the affected lands realizing the inventory of seeds, capacity of nurseries, 
and site considerations and practicality of regeneration practices in those areas. This AON for 
the State Seed Bank was developed using a spatial approach identifying conifer forest on state 
and private lands. Information on individual tree species growing on these lands was then 
extracted for each seed zone and 500-ft elevation band and matched against the State Seed 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
8  
Bank inventory. The AON allows a methodical approach for allocating State-held resources to 
areas of highest priority for reforestation as well as defining programmatic areas necessary for 
increased success. The assessment not only allows us to best allocate our resources in the form 
of surveying and collecting cones but can give us internal directives as to how to strategize 
other initiatives like investment in related seed tree orchards, prioritizing limited processing 
and freezer space, collaborating with industry partners to formulate response plans, directing 
funding for local projects, and other endeavors. 
 
It may be deemed that a regional approach, based on more delineated topographic and 
climatic descriptions, other than seed zone, could be further assistive. Support of advanced 
tools and protocols should also be considered to make the process more streamlined and 
efficient. CAL FIRE-s Fire and Resource Assessment Program (FRAP), along with the 
Reforestation Services Program staff, used spatial data and Geographic Information System 
(GIS) overlay analysis using Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) and Python 
software. The data comes from a variety of federal and state government sources, including 
CAL FIRE, the U.S. Forest Service, and the U.S. Geological Survey. The results of the analysis are 
both a visual representation of the data as well as a functional tool that allows the user to 
estimate the bushels needed to successfully regenerate specific species of conifer forests. The 
following is a list of the steps followed to perform the analysis. 
 
 
A. Establish the spatial extent of the analysis, focused on productive conifer forests 
 
The LA Moran seed bank collects seed primarily for regenerating conifer forests on non- 
industrial private forestlands as well as State-owned public lands. We estimated the spatial 
extent of these lands using three data sources described in the following paragraphs.  
 
To identify areas of conifer vegetation, we used most recent vegetation data hosted by the 
Landscape Ecology, Modeling, Mapping, and Analysis (LEMMA) program at Oregon State 
University and supported by researchers at the U.S. Forest Service. This data maps current 
vegetation type, an attribute that identifies up to two dominant tree species based on basal 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
9  
area, and groups vegetation type into a broader vegetation class, such as a conifer or a 
broadleaf forest. We first filtered LEMMA vegetation class to include only conifer and mixed 
forests.  
 
LEMMA vegetation data reports what is on the ground at the time of remote sensing. CAL FIRE 
has a spatial layer that depicts productive timberlands, whether the areas are currently 
forested or not (Forest Practice Timberlands 22_3). This dataset is a manipulation of both 
current and historic LEMMA data and spatially incorporates multiple vegetation years into one 
composite footprint. For example, an area that has been recently harvested will not be 
classified as a forest in the most recent LEMMA data but will be reported as productive 
timberland in Timberlands. To complete a depiction of conifer forests that may not be 
currently forested, our second step was to add productive timberland areas to conifer and 
mixed forests flagged in step 1.   
 
The analysis focused on state and private lands and so needed to exclude federal lands. We 
used the CAL FIRE State Responsibility Area (SRA) layer, which identifies lands that fall within 
the State Department-s jurisdiction for fire protection, Federal Responsibility Area for fire 
protection (FRA), and Local Responsibility Area for fire protection (LRA). We identified conifer 
forest and timberland areas that fall within the federal jurisdiction and dropped them from our 
analysis. This final step left us with a boundary of productive conifer forests on non-federal 
lands. We refer to it as the -footprint- of the analysis (Figure 1). 
 
B. Control for climate and elevation - seed zones and elevation bands 
 
The collection of seed for successful regeneration should account for environmental variables 
as species differ in growth and success depending on climate, soils, and elevation. We used 
seed zones to account for climactic and soil variation throughout the state. Seed zones are 
defined by major areas in California having similar climatic, topographic, and soil conditions. 
The original mapped seed zones were first proposed in 1946 with the most recent version 
having been revised in 1966 and published as part of a joint report between the USDA Forest 
Service and CAL FIRE in 1970. Denoted by a three-digit identifier and broken out into 85 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
10  
distinct zones within 32 subregions contained within 6 overarching regions, the map attempts 
to base the location of native tree plantings within close proximity and elevation to the 
collected seed source from which those trees were propagated. 
 
The regions, known as Physiographic and Climatic Regions, are depicted by the first digit in the 
three-digit designation for each seed zone. Divisions of the regions, called subregions, were 
delineated based on the next lower level of environmental changes known to affect growth and 
adaptability of plants. These are designated by the second digit in the three-digit seed zone 
number. Divisions of the subregions, called subzones, are indicated by the third digit in the 
three-digit seed zone number. Individual subzones within subregions were defined based on 
the overall framework of approximately 50 miles in latitude and further refinement in 
uniformity of environment within subregion. Subzone boundaries were made to follow natural 
or physical features (FRAP, 2003) (Figure 2). 
 
We used elevation to further refine climatic and soil variation boundaries. A 10-meter 
resolution digital elevation model (DEM) from the USGS depicting elevation was converted into 
smoothed elevation contours that delineate the 500-foot bands (Figure 3). 
 
C. Calculate measures of disturbance to conifer forests  
 
To include measures of natural disturbances to conifer forests, we used data on wildfire 
perimeters, wildfire burn severity, and areas of tree mortality due to insects and disease 
between 2018 and 2024. These are the areas where heavy reforestation may be necessary.  
In addition to seed need calculations for each species at a particular seed zone and elevation 
band, site-specific analyses of seed needs will be targeted to these disturbed areas to 
influence collection needs. 
 
Perimeters of large wildfires at least 100 acres in size come from CAL FIRE FRAP-s fire 
perimeter dataset that includes wildfires managed by state, local, or federal agencies for the 
past 100 years (Figure 4). We focused on perimeter areas that burned non-federal conifer 
forests defined by the analysis footprint and calculated the total acreage burned in each seed 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
11  
zone and elevation band area using overlay analysis. A list of wildfire names and complex 
names if any wildfires were part of a complex are also included for each area. 
 
To account for the variation in burn severity, and thus variation in disturbance and need for 
reforestation across the spatial extent of the fire, we performed similar calculations for 
wildfire areas that burned at high severity only (Figure 5). The result was the total high-
severity acreage burned in each seed zone and elevation band area. Boundaries of high-
severity wildfire burn patches are mapped for wildfires of at least 1000 acres by the 
Monitoring Trends in Burn Severity (MTBS), an interagency program that includes contributors 
like the U.S. Forest Service and the Department of Interior.  
 
A final measure of disturbance to conifer forests is based on the U.S. Forest Service-s Aerial 
Detection Surveys (ADS). This data maps areas of forest damage and mortality due to insects 
and disease (Figure 6). From this data, we derived measures of acreage affected by insects and 
disease and total tree mortality due to such diseases in a way analogous to wildfire acreage 
calculations. We restricted the damaged forest areas to those that contain our conifer species 
of interest (listed in the next section) and to the analysis footprint. Using the resulting damage 
boundaries and the recorded average tree mortality per acre, we estimated total acreage and 
total mortality count in each seed zone and elevation band area.   
 
D. Determine species distribution and calculate reforestation acres per target species for each 
500- elevation band in each seed zone 
 
We subset vegetation data that maps dominant tree species described in step A to our 
footprint of non-federal productive conifer forests. We further filtered all species identified by 
the vegetation data to the 15 conifer species of interest: 
1. Big-Cone Douglas Fir 
2. Coast Redwood 
3. Coulter Pine 
4. Douglas Fir  
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
12  
5. Giant Sequoia  
6. Incense Cedar  
7. Jeffrey Pine  
8. Knobcone Pine  
9. Lodgepole Pine  
10. Ponderosa Pine  
11. Red Fir  
12. Subalpine Fir  
13. Sugar Pine  
14. Western White Pine  
15. White Fir 
 
While not the only species present in the State Seed Bank, the above-mentioned species are 
the primary species or forest types that are requested and focused on due to demand and 
storability. As such, hardwoods, like oaks, maples, and walnuts, as well as native conifer 
species of less commercial value, such as Torrey pine and Monterey pine, are not included. This 
is not to suggest that the RSP will not collect these species, but for the purposes of prioritizing 
the most requested tree species to support reforestation, the above species were the initial 
focus. The RSP will always serve as a genetic library for native tree species in California and will 
employ more localized prioritization for special status species when available for collection. As 
the RSP matures and expands, we will begin to include hardwoods and other native shrubs.  
 
We overlayed the resulting subset of the vegetation layer with seed zone and 500-ft elevation 
band boundaries to extract information on share of area covered by each species in each 
unique seed zone and elevation band combination. We converted this area share to acres 
based on the resolution of the vegetation data to get targeted reforestation acres for all 
species of interest within each seed zone and elevation band. 
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
13  
 
 
 
 
E. Generate trees per acre and total bushels per target species for each 500- elevation band in 
each seed zone 
An average stocking requirement of 200 trees per acre (TPA) was applied to targeted 
reforestation acres for all species found above. This number was derived as an acceptable 
average carrying capacity for forestlands relative to CA Forest Practice Rule (FPR) requirements 
that can range between 50 and 200 TPA depending on location and forest management 
prescriptions. This stocking requirement was applied and generated the number of total trees 
needed to reforest target acres in each seed zone and elevation within a 500- elevation band 
with the assumption of each acre needing maximum stocking in the worst-case hypothetical 
scenario. 
 
Conifer seed collections are classified as number of bushels needed in terms of harvesting 
based on species. One bushel consists of 8 dry gallons of opened cones. A conversion is needed 
to get from acres to number of bushels. The process comprises determining, on a per species 
basis; the average seed per pound, average seedling produced per pound, number of pounds 
needed to collect, and finally number of bushels needed. 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
14  
Datasets for those processes were obtained as follows: 
 
Average seed per pound 
 
LAMRC inventory data were used to obtain data averages per species. 
Average seedlings produced per pound 
 
= (average seed per pound/average seed per pot) x percent survival rate in 
nursery x average probability of a tree in nursery. 
 
Historical LAMRC nursery datasets were used for: 
i. number of seeds per pot- is determined based on the germination 
calculations. 
ii. percent survival in nursery- seed that germinated and grew to a two- 
year seedling. 
iii. average probability of tree in nursery- seedlings that were thinned and 
were able to be transplanted. 
Number of pounds needed to collect 
 
= (number of trees in reforestation acres/average seedlings per pound) 
 
Number of bushels needed 
= (number of pounds needed to collect/average pounds of clean seed per bushel).  
 
Clean seed is defined as seed that has been processed to have >95% purity, <9% moisture content, and is 
ready for long-term storage. Bushels were rounded to whole numbers. Average pound of clean seed per 
bushel was obtained via historical records shown in Table 2. For species not represented in the table, a 
conversion of one bushel of seed equaling one pound of seed was assumed. 
 
 
 
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
15  
Species Avg. No. Cones/Bushel Avg. Lbs. Clean Seed/Bushel 
Big-Cone Douglas Fir 300-400 0.75 
Coast Redwood 1000s 0.75 
Coulter Pine 10-12 0.9 
Douglas Fir 900-1000 0.5 
Giant Sequoia 1000s 0.75 
Incense Cedar 1000s 0.7 
Jeffrey Pine 35-50 1.2 
Ponderosa Pine 90-100 1 
Red Fir 50-65 0.9 
Sugar Pine 12-18 1.4 
White Fir 170-200 1.1 
 
Table 2: LAMRC records of average number of cones and clean seed obtained per species. 
 
Current LAMRC seed bank inventories (comprised of wild and orchard seeds) are measured in 
pounds which were also converted to bushels needed based on process # 4 detailed above. 
Inventory datasets were matched to the spatial dataset with estimated need based on species, 
elevation, and seed zone. The final result shows deficits as positive bushel counts and excess 
as negative bushel counts. It is worth noting that the final values of bushel deficit/excess do not 
take into account private, industrial seed bank inventories. Figure 7 shows the spatial logic of 
the entire AON creation process and provides an excerpt of the final data.  
 
F. Supplementary data for coordination of seed collection 
The most recent analysis includes supplementary information on CAL FIRE timber harvesting 
operations, demonstration state forests, and parcel ownership data designed to facilitate 
coordination of seed collection. For each unique seed zone and elevation band combination, 
we present a list of Timber Harvesting Plans, Notices of Timber Operations, and Nonindustrial 
Timber Management Plans that are at least 100 acres in size and are either approved or 
unlogged. We identify any demonstration state forests that appear within each seed zone and 
elevation band area boundary. We also flag parcels 40 or more acres in size that overlap with 
the non-federal conifer forest footprint boundary and that are located in each seed zone and 
elevation band. Additional data on parcel ownership, zoning, and other sensitive information 
is available conditional on completion of restricted parcel data access agreement paperwork.  
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
16  
H. Final bushel needs and collection priority index 
 
The 2025 Seed Bank AON is an extensive list representing a spatial analysis baseline of the 
number of bushels required to reforest 25% of productive conifer forests on non-federal lands, 
along with natural disturbance statistics, CAL FIRE timber harvesting operations, demonstration 
state forests, and parcel data within each seed zone and 500- elevation band. 
 
Final bushel needs statistics are color-coded to aid in visualizing collection priority based on an 
assigned priority index ranging from 1 to 3. Bushel needs higher than 100 are colored in red 
and are coded as priority 1. Bushel needs between 11 and 100 are colored in orange and 
receive priority level 2. Bushel needs of 10 or less are colored in yellow and are marked as the 
lowest priority 3.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
As of May 2025, a total of 55,978 bushels of conifer seed needs to be collected throughout the 
entire state of California to accomplish the 25% reforestation goal statewide on the lands 
included. This total number shows a reduction of 900 bushels from last year-s estimate. The 
change reflects total seed collected in 2024 and updates to the underlying vegetation and 
timberlands data described above. 
 
Internally, the AON is being used to assist CAL FIRE Unit Foresters and their staff by providing a 
list of species, per seed zone, and elevation band that can be tailored to match cone survey 
routes when possible. Externally, CAL FIRE is using the AON to assist with discussions 
surrounding seed acquisition and collaborations with private industrial timberland owners, 
other government organizations, non-profits, and research institutions. A public viewer that 
summarizes AON results is also available on the RSP website here to anyone interested in 
California's reforestation efforts. The viewer maps statistics on bushel needs and other 
supplementary data for each seed zone and elevation band boundary. It includes a variety of 
filters and queries based on geographic boundaries or bushel needs distribution, a summary of 
aggregate need for filtered areas, and a tool to upload additional data of choice to the viewer 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
17  
from a variety of sources.  
 
 
 
 
The intent of the AON approach is to incorporate quantitative data to provide a guide for areas 
to focus resources and collection efforts on. Logic and rationale still need to be implemented 
with the AON acting synergistically with recommendations from a Registered Professional 
Forester or other qualified land managers in the field. CAL FIRE-s Reforestation Services 
Program looks forward to making annual updates to this document, related tools, and guidance 
in hopes that refined methodologies and enhanced data will better serve the purposes of this 
assessment. Please refer to the contributors section below with any questions or concerns. 
 
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
18  
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
 
Assessment of Needs (AON) - Also referred to as the -Seed Needs Assessment-, i.e. this 
document. Accompanied by quantified, tabular, localized data, this analysis is designed to be 
conducted yearly by CAL FIRE staff and shared internally as well as with cooperators to better 
assess where source tree materials are needed at defined levels. 
Budget Change Proposal (BCP) - A formal document required when an office needs additional 
resources or reduction of resources to change the level of funding for activities that need to be 
authorized by the State Legislature. 
Bushel - Measurement of dry volume of tree cones, represented as 8 dry gallons. 
 
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) - California Natural Resources 
Agency-s fire department whose mission is to serve and safeguard the people and protect the 
property and resources of California. It does this by supporting staff engaged in engineering; 
research, development, and adoption of regulations; fire and life safety programs; fire 
prevention, law enforcement, and public information and education; resource protection; and 
emergency response. 
California Wildfire and Forest Resilience Action Plan - A strategy to restore the health and 
resilience of California forests, grasslands, and natural places. In addition, improve fire safety of 
communities and sustain the economic viability of rural forested areas. 
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) - A computer graphic based on elevation data. It is comprised of 
cells of a certain length and width as well as their elevation above zero. They are used to 
represent topography and elevation. 
Federal Responsibility Area (FRA) - Areas where the federal government has jurisdiction to first 
respond to emergencies to include wildfires. These areas are marked primarily by federal 
ownership, such as National Forests, National Parks, lands owned by the Bureau of Land 
Management, the United States Military and others. 
Fire and Resource Assessment Program (FRAP) - A CAL FIRE program whose primary function is 
to analyze spatial data, model environmental variables, and create environmental spatial data 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
19  
layers to inform land management. FRAP assesses the amount and extent of California's forests 
and rangelands, analyzes their conditions, and identifies alternative management and policy 
guidelines. 
Forest Practice Rules (FPRs), aka Forest Practice Act - Laws enacted in 1973 and enforced by 
CAL FIRE that regulate logging on privately-owned lands in California to ensure it is done in a 
manner that will preserve and protect fish, wildlife, forests, and streams. 
Lewis A. Moran Reforestation Center (LAMRC) - See Reforestation Services Program and State 
Nursery. 
Local Responsibility Area (LRA) - An incorporated area where the local government is 
responsible for providing emergency services including fire protection. Emergency response in 
these areas is typically provided by city fire departments, fire protection districts, counties, and 
by CAL FIRE under contract. 
Reforestation - Replanting trees (aka artificial regeneration) or supporting the regrowth of 
trees from seed and stump sprouting (aka as natural regeneration), in previously forested areas 
that have been affected by both natural and/or unnatural disturbances. 
Reforestation Services Program (RSP) - Based out of the LAMRC in Davis, CA, the RSP is a CAL 
FIRE Resource Management Program whose mission is to provide California landowners and 
managers with resources needed to restore disturbed lands to maximize the values of highly 
productive forests. 
Seed Lot - A uniform quantity of seed within a permitted tolerance for percentage of pure seed 
and other crop and inert matter. 
Seed Zones - An inventory system that classifies seeds for collection and planting by 
physiographic zones. Major areas in California having similar climatic, topographic, and soil 
conditions are given the name "Physiographic and Climatic Regions." These are areas where 
plant materials can be moved or transferred with minimal risk of being poorly adapted to new 
location. 
State Nursery - CAL FIRE-owned and operated facility that grows tree species for forest 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
20  
restoration purposes for private and public landowners utilizing native seed stored at the State 
Seed Bank. While there were previously multiple sites operating as such, the only facility in 
operation currently is the Lewis A. Moran Reforestation Center (LAMRC) in Davis capable of 
growing approximately 250,000 1-year seedlings. 
State Responsibility Area (SRA) - Areas where the State of California has the primary 
responsibility for providing emergency services including fire protection. The emergency service 
is typically provided by CAL FIRE. 
State Seed Bank - CAL FIRE-owned and operated facility in Davis, CA that processes and stores 
native tree seed for on or off-site growing at nurseries for forest restoration purposes for 
private and public landowners. A zero-degree freezer currently is able to preserve over 40,000 
pounds of various seed at this site. 
Stocking - A measure of the degree to which space is occupied by well-distributed countable 
trees on forested land per the California Forest Practice Rules. 
Timberland - Land, other than land owned by the federal government and land designated by 
the board as experimental forest land, which is available for, and capable of, growing a crop of 
trees of a commercial species used to produce lumber and other forest products, including 
Christmas trees. 
Trees Per Acre (TPA) - The average number of trees, of a given size, present on any one acre of 
a forested tract. 
Unit - Also known as a CAL FIRE Administrative Unit, these represent the 21 geographical 
response areas within California that provide resource management and fire protection 
services. 
USDA Forest Service (USFS) - Agency of the U.S Department of Agriculture that administers the 
nation's 154 national forests and 20 national grasslands. 
United States Geological Survey (USGS) - Agency of the U.S. Department of Interior that 
studies the landscape of the U.S., its natural resources and the natural hazards that threaten 
it. It is the nation-s largest water, earth, and biological science and civilian mapping agency. 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
21  
CONTRIBUTORS 
 
Natalia Orlova, GIS Data Specialist II: natalia.orlova@fire.ca.gov 
 
Marisol Villarreal, Assistant Seed Bank Manager/Environmental Scientist:  
marisol.villarreal@fire.ca.gov 
 
Spencer Lachman, Environmental Scientist: spencer.lachman@fire.ca.gov 
 
Topher Byrd, Statewide Reforestation Coordinator: topher.byrd@fire.ca.gov 
 
James Scheid, Reforestation Services Program Manager: james.scheid@fire.ca.gov 
 
Stewart McMorrow, Wildfire Resilience Program Staff Chief: stewart.mcmorrow@fire.ca.gov 
 
 
RESOURCES 
Aerial Detection Survey (ADS) tree mortality data - https://www.fs.usda.gov/science-
technology/data-tools-products/fhp-mapping-reporting/detection-surveys  
California Department of Forestry & Fire Protection-s (CAL FIRE-s) Forest & Resources 
Assessment Program (FRAP) (including maps) - https://www.fire.ca.gov/what-we-do/fire-
resource-assessment-program 
CAL FIRE-s Reforestation Services Program (Reforestation Center) -
https://www.fire.ca.gov/what-we-do/natural-resource-management/wildfire-
resilience/reforestation-services-program 
California Forest Practice Rules - https://bof.fire.ca.gov/regulations/bills-statutes-rules-and-
annual-california-forest-practice-rules/ 
California Tree Seed Zones (publication, 1970) - https://www.fs.usda.gov/research/treesearch/41438 
 
California-s Wildfire & Forest Resilience Action Plan (2021) - https://wildfiretaskforce.org/the- 
plan/ 
Landscape Ecology, Modeling, Mapping, and Analysis (LEMMA) vegetation data - 
https://lemma.forestry.oregonstate.edu/data/home 
Monitoring Trends in Burn Severity (MTBS) wildfire severity data - 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
22  
https://www.mtbs.gov/direct-download 
USFS Reforestation Toolbox - https://www.fs.usda.gov/t-d/seedlings/conecoll/colmeth.htm 
 
 
 
PHOTO CREDIT 
 
Christie Hemm-Klok - National Geographic  
Christine McMorrow - CAL FIRE  
Evett Kilmartin 
Luciane Coletti 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
23  
APPENDIX 
 
Figure 1: Seed Needs Analysis Footprint 
 
 
 
Notes: This footprint is a combination of conifer forests and productive timberlands defined in the California 
Forest Practice Rules restricted to non-federal lands. Sources: LEMMA for vegetation data; CAL FIRE for 
productive timberlands (derived from LEMMA) and federal, state, and local responsibility area boundaries.
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
24  
Figure 2: California Seed Zones 
 
 
 
 
Notes: Seed zones are a three-digit numeric designation used to identify each seed collection zone. They are 
based on areas that have similar climatic, topographic, and edaphic conditions. Source: CAL FIRE.
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
25  
Figure 3: 500-Foot Elevation Bands 
 
 
 
Source: Authors- calculations of smoothed elevation contours based on USGS 10-meter resolution DEM 
data. 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
26  
Figure 4: Wildfire Perimeters in 2018-2024 
 
 
 
Notes: Only wildfires that burned 100 acres or more are included. Source: CAL FIRE.  
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
27  
Figure 5: High-Severity Wildfire Burn Perimeters in 2018-2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes: Severity data is mapped only for wildfires at least 1000 acres in size. Source: Monitoring Trends in 
Burn Severity (MTBS). 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
28  
Figure 6: Areas of Tree Mortality Due to Insects and Disease for Conifers of Interest in 2018-2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes: Mortality data was not collected in 2020. Source: Aerial Detection Surveys (ADS). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
29  
Figure 7: Spatial Analysis Logic 
 
 
 
Species 
Seed 
Zone 
Elevation 
(max)  
Bushel 
Need 
Collection 
Priority 
Acres 
Burned 
High-Severity 
Acres Burned 
Tree 
Mortality 
Acres 
Tree 
Mortality 
Count 
Coast Redwood 092 500 145 1 0 0 26,792 96,723 
Coast Redwood 092 1000 284 1 0 0 62,217 225,921 
Coast Redwood 092 1500 105 1 0 0 58,139 185,607 
Coast Redwood 093 1000 140 1 39 0 7,932 31,695 
Coast Redwood 094 1000 160 1 0 0 15,534 136,437 
Coast Redwood 095 500 151 1 1,238 8 1,733 3,908 
Coast Redwood 095 1000 124 1 23,202 3,104 5,692 86,999 
 
Notes: The table included in this figure is an example of what the final data looks like for some zones that 
grow high-priority Coast Redwood
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071
30  
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 3B624CB7-41C1-473C-A4CE-7EC77BADF071